Response to feedback on novel vaccines (#1174)
greenelab/covid19-review: content/24.vaccines-novel.md

Additionally, vaccine technologies that require only minor adjustments for novel viral threats are appealing because this modular approach would mean they could enter trials quickly in response to a new pathogen of concern.
While other platforms can carry some risks related to introducing all or part of a virus [@individual-vaccines-novel], nucleic acid-based platforms eliminate these risks entirely.
Additionally, vaccine technologies that could be adjusted for novel viral threats are appealing because this modular approach would mean they could enter trials quickly in response to a new pathogen of concern.

### Honing a 21^st^ Century Response to Emergent Viral Threats

Recently, vaccine technologies have been developed and refined in response to several epidemics that did not reach the level of destruction caused by COVID-19.
Emergent viral threats of the 21^st^ century include severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS), “swine flu” (H1N1 influenza), Middle East respiratory syndrome (MERS), Ebola virus disease (EVD), COVID-19, and monkeypox, all of which have underscored the importance of a rapid global response to a new infectious virus.

> Because vaccines fail to provide immediate prophylactic protection or treatment of ongoing infections, their application to most of these epidemics has been limited [@doi:10.3390/v10120680]. <!-- Aren't vaccines prophylactic? What is meant by immediate? I would think the problem for some of those diseases is that effective vaccines weren't developed quickly enough. -->

Reviewer: Fair point, I think the original meaning was it takes a few weeks to reach peak antibody production, but the point made in the comment is actually probably more indicative of why use has been limited in epidemics.

Although they were well-tolerated, these early attempts to develop vaccines were generally not very successful in inducing immunity to the target pathogen, with either limited T-cell or limited neutralizing antibody responses observed [@doi:10.1038/nrg2432].

Early plasmid-vectored DNA vaccine trials targeted HIV and subsequently diseases of worldwide importance such as malaria and hepatitis B [@doi:10/bvm6vh].
The concern with these early development projects was immunogenicity, not safety [@doi:10/bvm6vh].
Around the turn of the millennium, a hepatitis B vaccine development program demonstrated that these vaccines can induce both antibody and cellular immune response [@doi:10/c9ntfp].
As of 2018, however, only two plasmid-vectored DNA vaccines had been approved for commercial use, and both were for veterinary populations [@doi:10.5772/intechopen.76754].

##### Applications to COVID-19

Several plasmid-vectored DNA vaccines have been developed against COVID-19 (Table @tbl:approved-DNA).

> In fact, the ZyCoV-D vaccines developed by India's Zydus Cadila is the first plasmid-vectored DNA vaccine to receive approval or to be used in human medicine [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.10.056; @doi:10.1038/d41586-021-02385-x; 10.1001/jama.2021.16625].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In fact, the ZyCoV-D vaccines developed by India's Zydus Cadila is the first plasmid-vectored DNA vaccine to receive approval or to be used in human medicine [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.10.056; @doi:10.1038/d41586-021-02385-x; @doi:10.1001/jama.2021.16625].
```

The delivery and presentation of antigens is fundamental to inducing immunity against a virus.
Vaccines that deliver nucleic acids allow the introduction of foreign substances to the body to induce both humoral and cellular immune responses [@doi:10.1038/nrg2432].
Delivering a nucleic acid sequence to host cells allows the host to synthesize an antigen without exposure to a viral threat [@doi:10.1038/nrg2432].
Host-synthesized antigens can then be presented in complex with major histocompatibility complex (MHC) I and II, which can activate either T- or B-cells [@doi:10.1038/nrg2432].
While these vaccines encode specific proteins, providing many of the benefits of a protein subunit vaccine, they do not carry any risk of DNA being live, replicating, or spreading, and their manufacturing process lends itself to scalability [@doi:10.1038/nrg2432].
Here, opportunities can be framed in terms of the central dogma of genetics: instead of directly providing the proteins from the infectious agents, vaccines developers are exploring the potential for the delivery of DNA or RNA to induce the cell to produce proteins from the virus that in turn induce a host immune response.

> <!-- This paragraph is repetetive. What parts do we need? Delete the rest and move refs doi:10.1358/dot.2018.54.5.2807864 and doi:10.1016/j.coi.2016.05.008. -->

Author: This paragraph was split up and moved to lines 96, 112, 114

Around the turn of the millennium, a hepatitis B vaccine development program demonstrated that these vaccines can induce both antibody and cellular immune response [@doi:10/c9ntfp].
As of 2018, however, only two plasmid-vectored DNA vaccines had been approved for commercial use, and both were for veterinary populations [@doi:10.5772/intechopen.76754].

##### Applications to COVID-19

Several plasmid-vectored DNA vaccines have been developed against COVID-19 (Table @tbl:approved-DNA).

> In fact, the ZyCoV-D vaccines developed by India's Zydus Cadila is the first plasmid-vectored DNA vaccine to receive approval or to be used in human medicine [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2020.10.056; @doi:10.1038/d41586-021-02385-x; 10.1001/jama.2021.16625].

Author: [This](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/2784978) specifically says it is the "first clinical use" of a "DNA vaccine" in humans, but that can't be right, because viral-vectored vaccines were used before 8/2021

Reviewer: I think that's correct, they are saying it is because it is the first use of a plasmid of bacterial origin that has been approved in humans (plenty preclinical stuff out there) - at least up to 2018 none were approved in humans 10.3390/medsci6020027

Author: Thank you Ronan!!!

Only one treatment-related AE was observed and the vaccine was found to be associated with a significant increase in neutralizing activity [@doi:10.1101/2021.05.07.21256652]. 
Results of phase III trials are not yet available [@{url:https://ir.inovio.com/news-releases/news-releases-details/2021/INOVIO-Receives-U.S.-FDA-Authorization-to-Proceed-with-INNOVATE-Phase-3-Segment-for-its-COVID-19-Vaccine-Candidate-INO-4800-in-the-U.S/default.aspx}; @{url:https://ir.inovio.com/news-releases/news-releases-details/2021/INOVIO-Further-Expands-INNOVATE-Phase-3-Trial-for-COVID-19-DNA-Vaccine-Candidate-INO-4800-With-Regulatory-Authorization-from-India/default.aspx}; @{url:https://ir.inovio.com/news-releases/news-releases-details/2021/INOVIO-Expands-INNOVATE-Phase-3-for-INO-4800-its-DNA-Vaccine-Candidate-for-COVID-19-to-include-Colombia-following-Regulatory-Authorization/default.aspx}; @{url:https://ir.inovio.com/news-releases/news-releases-details/2021/INOVIO-Receives-Regulatory-Authorization-to-Conduct-Phase-3-Efficacy-Trial-of-its-COVID-19-DNA-Vaccine-Candidate-INO-4800-in-Mexico/default.aspx}].

> Trials of ZyCoV-D have progressed further. 

Author: Added because it felt too weird to skip this one, given that it was the first DNA vaccine to receive full approval.

Reviewer: Agreed

An important consideration in identifying potential vectors is the immune response to the vector.
Both the innate and adaptive immune responses can potentially respond to the vector, limiting the ability of the vaccine to transfer information to the immune system [@doi:10.1038/gt.2009.148].
Different vectors are associated with different levels of reactogenicity; for example, adenoviruses elicit a much stronger innate immune response than replication deficient adeno-associated viruses derived from parvoviruses [@doi:10.1038/gt.2009.148].
Additionally, using a virus circulating widely in human populations as a vector presents additional challenges because vaccine recipients may already have developed an immune response to the vector [@doi:10.3390/vaccines2030624]. 

> Furthermore, repeated exposure to Ad viruses via viral-vectored DNA vaccines may increase reactivity to these vectors over time, presenting a challenge that will need to be considered in long-term development of these vaccines [@doi:10.1006/viro.2000.0350; @doi:10.4161/hv.29594].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, repeated exposure to adenoviruses via viral-vectored DNA vaccines may increase reactivity to these vectors over time, presenting a challenge that will need to be considered in long-term development of these vaccines [@doi:10.1006/viro.2000.0350; @doi:10.4161/hv.29594].
```

Different vectors are associated with different levels of reactogenicity; for example, adenoviruses elicit a much stronger innate immune response than replication deficient adeno-associated viruses derived from parvoviruses [@doi:10.1038/gt.2009.148].

> Additionally, using a virus circulating widely in human populations as a vector presents additional challenges because vaccine recipients may already have developed an immune response to the vector [@doi:10.3390/vaccines2030624]. <!-- So does this also have implications about using the same vector multiple times to develop different vaccines? I recall reading about about that but not the details. -->

Author: I'm not sure and I'm not finding anything with the search terms I can think of! @RLordan, any ideas on this?

Reviewer: Yes, this is ringing bells. Came up for the sputnik vaccine, its why they used two different viral vectors... There is some population immunity to commonly used vectors. See example for H5N1 vaccine (10.1371/journal.pone. 0033428) and these papers (https://doi.org/10.1016/j.vaccine.2011.05.025) & (https://doi.org/10.1126/sciimmunol.abi8635)

The first reported that a single dose of ChAdOx1 MERS induced an immune response and inhibited viral replication in macaques [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aba8399].
The second reported promising results from a phase I trial that administered the vaccine to adults and measured safety, tolerability, and immune response [@doi:10/ggtxgp].

##### Application to COVID-19

![
**Worldwide availability of vaccines developed using non-replicating viral vectors.**<!--As a general comment on the choropleths, is there any way to increase resolution. Hard to see what’s happening in Europe and south east Asia.--><!--Updated from 300 to 600 after this comment in #1169, let's see if it helped-->
This figure reflects the number of vaccines using non-replicating viral vectors that were available in each country as of {{owid_most_recent_date}}.
These data are retrieved from Our World in Data [@doi:10.1038/s41562-021-01122-8] and plotted using geopandas [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.5573592].
See https://greenelab.github.io/covid19-review/ for the most recent version of this figure, which is updated daily.

> Note that this figure draws from a different data source than Table @tbl:approved-DNA and does not necessarily include data for every vaccine developed within this category

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this figure draws from a different data source than Table @tbl:approved-DNA and does not necessarily include data for every vaccine developed within this category.
```

> Note that this figure draws from a different data source than Table @TBL:approved-DNA and does not necessarily include data for every vaccine developed within this category.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that this figure draws from a different data source than Table @tbl:approved-DNA and does not necessarily include data for every vaccine developed within this category.
```

Consequently, many international scientific agencies and public health bodies expressed concern that due diligence to the clinical trial process was subverted for the sake of expediency, leading many to question the safety and efficacy of Sputnik V [@doi:10.1126/science.abe3147; @url:https://www.cnbc.com/2020/08/11/scientists-worry-whether-russias-sputnik-v-coronavirus-vaccine-is-safe-and-effective.html; @doi:10/ft7j].
Despite regulatory, safety, and efficacy concerns, pre-orders for 1 billion doses of the Sputnik V were reported within days of the vaccine's approval in Russia [@doi:10/ft7j].
Almost a month later, the phase I/II trial data was published [@doi:10/gg96hq]
It wasn't until February 2021, six months after its approval in Russia, that interim results of the phase III trial were released [@doi:10/ghxj4g].

> This publication reported a VE of 91% and a low rate of serious AEs, although there were several serious AEs that were determined not to be associated with the vaccine by an independent data monitoring committee about which little other information was released [@url:https://sputnikvaccine.com/about-vaccine/clinical-trials]. 

Author: Added some text based on https://github.com/greenelab/covid19-review/pull/856/files#r575539669

As of {{owid_most_recent_date}}, {{owid_RNA_count}} mRNA vaccines are available in {{owid_RNA_countries}} countries (Figure @fig:mRNA-distrib).

![
**Worldwide availability of vaccines developed using mRNA.**
This figure reflects the number of vaccines based on mRNA technology that were available in each country as of {{owid_most_recent_date}}.
These data are retrieved from Our World in Data [@doi:10.1038/s41562-021-01122-8] and plotted using geopandas [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.5573592].
See https://greenelab.github.io/covid19-review/ for the most recent version of this figure, which is updated daily.
Note that this figure draws from a different data source than Table @tbl:approved-RNA and does not necessarily include data for every vaccine developed within this category.
]({{owid_RNA_map}} "Availability of mRNA vaccines"){#fig:mRNA-distrib secno=1}

> The rapid and simultaneous development of these vaccines was met with some controversy related to intellectual property (IP).

Reviewer: Thanks @rando2 reading through now, I realized I missed a paragraph or two

> The rapid and simultaneous development of these vaccines was met with some controversy related to intellectual property (IP).

Reviewer: The lawsuit info is perfect, not for us to speculate

These data are retrieved from Our World in Data [@doi:10.1038/s41562-021-01122-8] and plotted using geopandas [@doi:10.5281/zenodo.5573592].
See https://greenelab.github.io/covid19-review/ for the most recent version of this figure, which is updated daily.
Note that this figure draws from a different data source than Table @tbl:approved-RNA and does not necessarily include data for every vaccine developed within this category.
]({{owid_RNA_map}} "Availability of mRNA vaccines"){#fig:mRNA-distrib secno=1}

The rapid and simultaneous development of these vaccines was met with some controversy related to intellectual property (IP).
First, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and Moderna became involved in a patent dispute, after researchers at the NIH argued they were unfairly excluded from some patents filed based on their IP after they generated the stabilized modRNA sequence used in the vaccine [@doi:10.1038/d41586-021-03535-x].
Ultimately, in late 2021, Moderna backed down on the patent application [@url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2021/12/17/moderna-vaccine-patent-dispute-nih].

> However, in August 2022, the company filed their own suit against Pfizer/BioNTech over IP related to to the modRNA used in the latter's COVID-19 vaccine [@url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2021/12/17/moderna-vaccine-patent-dispute-nih; @url:https://www.cnn.com/2022/08/26/health/moderna-pfizer-mrna-patent-lawsuit/index.html].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
However, in August 2022, the company filed their own suit against Pfizer/BioNTech over IP related to the modRNA used in the latter's COVID-19 vaccine [@url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/2021/12/17/moderna-vaccine-patent-dispute-nih; @url:https://www.cnn.com/2022/08/26/health/moderna-pfizer-mrna-patent-lawsuit/index.html].
```

> The outcome of this suit remains to be seen.

Reviewer 2: Too bad we never finished work on the very first manubot issue `https://github.com/manubot/manubot/issues/1`: support for citing legal cases!

Among the five cases in fully vaccinated and 11 cases in partially vaccined participants, the rate of infection by VOC was much higher than in the unvaccinated population (30% versus 10%), suggesting that the vaccine was less effective against the VOC than the index strain.

The WHO continues to monitor the emergence of variants and their impact on vaccine efficacy [@url:https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/detail/the-effects-of-virus-variants-on-covid-19-vaccines].
In general, mRNA vaccines remain highly effective against severe illness and death, but the effectiveness against infection generally has declined.
A study monitoring infections in a Minnesota cohort from January to July 2021 estimated that the effectiveness of the Moderna vaccine fell to 86% and Pfizer to 76%, although protection against hospitalization remained at 91% and 85%, respectively [@doi:10.1101/2021.08.06.21261707].
In July of that year, as the Delta variant became dominant in the U.S.A., these estimates all fell, to an effectiveness of 76% for Moderna and 42% for Pfizer and effectiveness against hospitalization of 81% and 75%, respectively [@doi:10.1101/2021.08.06.21261707].

> With the emergence of the Omicron VOC, vaccine effectiveness has likely further declined.

Author: New paragraph (old paragraph talked about nAbs but there have been additional studies since we wrote that)

Reviewer: This is better

A study in South Africa compared case and hospitalization records from a 4-week period where Omicron was dominant to a 2-month period where Delta was dominant and found that the effectiveness against hospitalization during the Omicron wave was approximately 70% compared to 93% during the Delta wave [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2119270].
Similarly, a large study in England of 2.5 million individuals suggested that not only the variants circulating, but also the time since vaccination, played a large role in vaccine effectiveness [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2119451].
Shortly after the BNT162b2 primary course, effectiveness against the Omicron VOC was as high as 65.5%, but this declined to below 10% by six months after the second dose.
For mRNA-1273, the decline was from 75.1% to 14.9%.
Therefore, it is unsurprising that in spite of vaccination programs, infection rates and hospitalization rates climbed in early 2022 in many Western countries including the United States [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/us/covid-cases.html; @{url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/interactive/2022/omicron-comparison-cases-deaths-hospitalizations/}].

> On the side of safety, the only major concern that has been raised is a possible link between mRNA vaccination and myocarditis, especially in young men [@doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7032e4].

Author: Added this paragraph in response to feedback from Tony

Reviewer: Maybe a drop in non-pharmacological approaches to mitigation were a factor too for early 2022

Author: see above!

Reviewer: Thanks!

With the emergence of the Omicron VOC, vaccine effectiveness has likely further declined.
A study in a diverse cohort in Southern California, U.S.A. found the effectiveness of the Moderna vaccine in participants who had received only the primary course to be 44% [@doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01753-y].
A study in South Africa compared case and hospitalization records from a 4-week period where Omicron was dominant to a 2-month period where Delta was dominant and found that the effectiveness against hospitalization during the Omicron wave was approximately 70% compared to 93% during the Delta wave [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2119270].
Similarly, a large study in England of 2.5 million individuals suggested that not only the variants circulating, but also the time since vaccination, played a large role in vaccine effectiveness [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2119451].
Shortly after the BNT162b2 primary course, effectiveness against the Omicron VOC was as high as 65.5%, but this declined to below 10% by six months after the second dose.
For mRNA-1273, the decline was from 75.1% to 14.9%.

> Therefore, it is unsurprising that in spite of vaccination programs, infection rates and hospitalization rates climbed in early 2022 in many Western countries including the United States [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/us/covid-cases.html; @{url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/interactive/2022/omicron-comparison-cases-deaths-hospitalizations/}].

Author: ```suggestion
Therefore, it is unsurprising that in spite of vaccination programs, infection rates and hospitalization rates climbed in early 2022 in many Western countries including the United States [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/us/covid-cases.html; @{url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/interactive/2022/omicron-comparison-cases-deaths-hospitalizations/}], especially given that many places simultaneously began to loosen public health restrictions designed to reduce viral spread..
```

On the side of safety, the only major concern that has been raised is a possible link between mRNA vaccination and myocarditis, especially in young men [@doi:10.15585/mmwr.mm7032e4].
This concern began with case reports of a small number of cases of myocarditis following vaccination in several countries [@doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.2021.05.087; @doi:10.1001/jamacardio.2021.2828].
Following these reports, the Israeli Ministry of Health began surveillance to monitor the occurrence of myocarditis [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2109730].
They identified 283 cases, almost exactly half of which occurred following vaccination with Pfizer's BNT162b2.
Close analysis of these cases determined that the vaccine did have a significant effect on the incidence of myocarditis; however, the rate of myocarditis remained low overall [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2109730].

> The identification of young men as a population at particular risk of this AE was supported, and the risk was found to be greater after the second dose than the first.

Reviewer: Should we mention recovery? My understanding is that yes there is a prevalence but mortality is very low.

Author: ```suggestion
The identification of young men as a population at particular risk of this AE was supported, and the risk was found to be greater after the second dose than the first.
However, most findings suggest that this AE does not have long-term negative effects; a 2021 meta-analysis identified 69 cases, all of which resulted in full recovery [@doi:10.7759/cureus.19240].
```

Reviewer: Perfect, thanks @rando2

However, most findings suggest that this AE does not have long-term negative effects; a 2021 meta-analysis identified 69 cases, all of which resulted in full recovery [@doi:10.7759/cureus.19240].
Although these events are very rare, as with the possible thromboembolic AEs associated with viral-vectored DNA vaccines, these findings suggest that it may be prudent to offer a framework for decision making for patients particularly concerned about specific AEs in settings where multiple vaccines are available.

### Booster Doses

Due to waning effectiveness of vaccines over time, especially in light of viral evolution, boosters have emerged as an important strategy in retaining the benefits of vaccination over time.
Booster shots are now recommended in many places, and boosters that account for multiple variants and strains of SARS-CoV-2 are now available in some places [@doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01230-y].

> For example, in the U.S.A., the FDA recently recommended bivalent booster doses designed to account for the Omicron VOC [@url:https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-recommends-inclusion-omicron-ba45-component-covid-19-vaccine-booster; @url:https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/covid19vaccine/99493; @1FMDHQCgs].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, in the U.S.A., the FDA recently recommended bivalent booster doses designed to account for the Omicron VOC [@url:https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-recommends-inclusion-omicron-ba45-component-covid-19-vaccine-booster; @url:https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/covid19vaccine/99493; @1FMDHQCgs].
In this case, bivalent refers to the fact that doses deliver both the original formulation and an updated vaccine designed for the Omicron subvariants circulating in summer 2022.
```
Reapplying this change that was marked outdated

With the emergence of the Omicron VOC, vaccine effectiveness has likely further declined.
A study in a diverse cohort in Southern California, U.S.A. found the effectiveness of the Moderna vaccine in participants who had received only the primary course to be 44% [@doi:10.1038/s41591-022-01753-y].
A study in South Africa compared case and hospitalization records from a 4-week period where Omicron was dominant to a 2-month period where Delta was dominant and found that the effectiveness against hospitalization during the Omicron wave was approximately 70% compared to 93% during the Delta wave [@doi:10.1056/NEJMc2119270].
Similarly, a large study in England of 2.5 million individuals suggested that not only the variants circulating, but also the time since vaccination, played a large role in vaccine effectiveness [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2119451].
Shortly after the BNT162b2 primary course, effectiveness against the Omicron VOC was as high as 65.5%, but this declined to below 10% by six months after the second dose.
For mRNA-1273, the decline was from 75.1% to 14.9%.

> Therefore, it is unsurprising that in spite of vaccination programs, infection rates and hospitalization rates climbed in early 2022 in many Western countries including the United States [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/us/covid-cases.html; @{url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/interactive/2022/omicron-comparison-cases-deaths-hospitalizations/}], especially given that many places simultaneously began to loosen public health restrictions designed to reduce viral spread..

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore, it is unsurprising that in spite of vaccination programs, infection rates and hospitalization rates climbed in early 2022 in many Western countries including the United States [@url:https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2021/us/covid-cases.html; @{url:https://www.washingtonpost.com/health/interactive/2022/omicron-comparison-cases-deaths-hospitalizations/}], especially given that many places simultaneously began to loosen public health restrictions designed to reduce viral spread.
```

Close analysis of these cases determined that the vaccine did have a significant effect on the incidence of myocarditis; however, the rate of myocarditis remained low overall [@doi:10.1056/NEJMoa2109730].
The identification of young men as a population at particular risk of this AE was supported, and the risk was found to be greater after the second dose than the first.
However, most findings suggest that this AE does not have long-term negative effects; a 2021 meta-analysis identified 69 cases, all of which resulted in full recovery [@doi:10.7759/cureus.19240].
Although these events are very rare, as with the possible thromboembolic AEs associated with viral-vectored DNA vaccines, these findings suggest that it may be prudent to offer a framework for decision making for patients particularly concerned about specific AEs in settings where multiple vaccines are available.

### Booster Doses

Due to waning effectiveness of vaccines over time, especially in light of viral evolution, boosters have emerged as an important strategy in retaining the benefits of vaccination over time.

> Booster shots are now recommended in many places, and vaccines in the near future will likely account for multiple variants and strains of SARS-CoV-2 [@doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01230-y].

Reviewer 2: We should rephrase the "will likely" given the existence of the bivalent boosters described below.

Author: ```suggestion
Booster shots are now recommended in many places, and boosters that account for multiple variants and strains of SARS-CoV-2 are now available in some places [@doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01230-y].
```

> For example, in the U.S.A., the FDA recently recommended bivalent booster doses designed to account for the Omicron VOC [@url:https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-recommends-inclusion-omicron-ba45-component-covid-19-vaccine-booster; @url:https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/covid19vaccine/99493; @url:https://www.fda.gov/media/159597/download].

Reviewer 2: Define "bivalent?"

Author: ```suggestion
For example, in the U.S.A., the FDA recently recommended bivalent booster doses designed to account for the Omicron VOC [@url:https://www.fda.gov/news-events/press-announcements/coronavirus-covid-19-update-fda-recommends-inclusion-omicron-ba45-component-covid-19-vaccine-booster; @url:https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/covid19vaccine/99493; @url:https://www.fda.gov/media/159597/download].
In this case, bivalent refers to the fact that doses deliver both the original formulation and an updated vaccine designed for the Omicron subvariants circulating in summer 2022.
```

Reviewer 2: This updated text looks good to me.  However, I can't apply the suggestion because the text is now considered outdated on GitHub.

In this case, bivalent refers to the fact that doses deliver both the original formulation and an updated vaccine designed for the Omicron subvariants circulating in summer 2022.

> The fact that the FDA did not require additional clinical trials from manufacturers for Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5 specifically suggests that the rapid authorization of strain changes in response to emerging VOC may be increasingly attainable [@url:https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharmaceuticals/fda-will-not-require-clinical-trial-data-authorize-redesigned-covid-boosters-2022-06-30/].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The fact that the FDA did not require additional clinical trials from manufacturers for Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5 specifically suggests that the rapid authorization of strain changes in response to emerging VOC may be increasingly attainable [@url:https://www.reuters.com/business/healthcare-pharmaceuticals/fda-will-not-require-clinical-trial-data-authorize-redesigned-covid-boosters-2022-06-30].
```

Homologous booster doses have been investigated for most vaccines.
For example, over 14,000 adults were administered a booster (second) dose of the Janssen Ad26.COV2.S vaccine [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.28.22270043].
The booster dose was highly efficacious, with severe COVID-19 and hospitalization prevented almost completely in the vaccinated group.
A booster dose was also found to improve immune response for Sputnik V vaccinees [@doi:10.1101/2021.12.17.21267976].
For the AstraZeneca vaccine, a different approach was taken.
In the interest of distributing first doses as widely as possible, in some places the time between the first and second doses was extended.
One study assessed the immunogenicity and reactogenicity associated with delaying the second dose in the prime-boost series until up to 45 weeks after the first, reporting that an extended inter-dose period was associated with increased antibody titers 28 days after the second dose [@doi:10/hx9c].

>  administering a third dose 28-38 weeks after the second dose [@doi:10/hx9c].

Reviewer 2: Delete this partial sentence?

One month later, the neutralizing geometric mean titer ratio was assessed against several variants of SARS-CoV-2, including Omicron.
The immune response was higher against all variants assessed, including Omicron, than for boosting with the original formulation (mRNA-1273).
Another formulation, mRNA-1273.211, developed based on the Beta variant, has been associated with durable protection as long as six months after dosing.
The associated publications suggest that this novel formulation offers significant protection against Omicron and other VOC [@doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01527-y; @doi:10.1056/NEJMc2119912]. 
In August 2022, Pfizer also announced successful development of a new formulation effective against Omicron [@doi:https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-and-biontech-announce-omicron-adapted-covid-19].

Modularity has been proposed as one of the advantages to developing DNA and mRNA vaccines.
This design would allow for faster adaptation to viral evolution.
However, in the arms race against SARS-CoV-2, the vaccines are still lagging behind the virus.

> This disadvantage may change as regulators become more familiar with these vaccines and as a critical mass of data is accumulated.

Author: @RLordan I remember hearing that the policies are changing in some spaces, but I'm not having much success finding specifics. Do you happen to have any details on the regulatory side? Eventually it will need to be like the flu vaccine, and I thought we were making steps in that direction!

Reviewer: The U.S, FDA has given a thumbs up to omicron booster shots: https://www.medpagetoday.com/infectiousdisease/covid19vaccine/99493

But note that Paul Offit Chop voted against it https://www.medpagetoday.com/opinion/faustfiles/100026

In August 2022, Pfizer also announced successful development of a new formulation effective against Omicron [@doi:https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-release-detail/pfizer-and-biontech-announce-omicron-adapted-covid-19].

Modularity has been proposed as one of the advantages to developing DNA and mRNA vaccines.
This design would allow for faster adaptation to viral evolution.
However, in the arms race against SARS-CoV-2, the vaccines are still lagging behind the virus.
This disadvantage may change as regulators become more familiar with these vaccines and as a critical mass of data is accumulated.
Given the apparent need for boosters, interest has also emerged in whether updated formulations of SARS-CoV-2 vaccines can be administered along with annual flu vaccines to improve immunity to novel variants.
<!-- What is our conclusion about this (or will that go in the Conclusion?). The potential of mRNA vaccines was rapid reformulation, but that hasn't really happened in practice (yet). -->

### Effect of Vaccines on Community Spread

> <!-- I suggest moving this entire section to the appendix. It is well written but long, not directly related to the rest of the sections, and somewhat inconclusive. We could keep the last sentence as part of the conclusions ("Evidence suggests that public health measures ...") and refer to the appendix to support that statement. -->

Author: I moved it to pathogenesis, since it seems like they are hoping we will submit updates, and this seems like worthwhile ground to cover if we update that one.

AstraZeneca's trial produced estimates in both ranges, with the standard dosage producing an efficacy of 62% and the lower prime dose producing a VE of 90%.
The mRNA vaccine trials were somewhat higher, with VE estimated at approximately 95% for both the Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech clinical trials.
However, in all cases, the efficacy against severe illness and death were very high.
Therefore, all of these vaccines are useful tools for combating COVID-19.

Furthermore, the fact that vaccine efficacy is not a static value has become particularly salient, as real-world effectiveness has changed with location and over time.
COVID-19 vaccines have been challenged by the emergence of VOC.
These VOC generally carry genetic mutations that code for an altered Spike protein (i.e., the antigen), so the antibodies resulting from immunization with vaccines developed from the index strain neutralize them less effectively [@doi:10.1101/2021.11.11.21266068; @url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/science-briefs/scientific-brief-omicron-variant.html].

> Despite some reports of varying and reduced effectiveness or efficacy of the mRNA vaccines against the Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), and Delta (B.1.617.2) variants versus the original SARS-CoV-2 strain or the D614G variant [@DOI:10.1038/s41591-021-01318-5; @doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03398-2; @DOI:10.1001/jama.2021.4388], the greatest concern to date has been the Omicron variant (B.1.1.529), which was first identified in November 2021 [@{url:https://www.who.int/news/item/26-11-2021-classification-of-omicron-(b.1.1.529)-sars-cov-2-variant-of-concern}; @url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/science-briefs/scientific-brief-omicron-variant.html].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Despite some reports of varying and reduced effectiveness or efficacy of the mRNA vaccines against the Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), and Delta (B.1.617.2) variants versus the original SARS-CoV-2 strain or the D614G variant [@doi:10.1038/s41591-021-01318-5; @doi:10.1038/s41586-021-03398-2; @doi:10.1001/jama.2021.4388], the greatest concern to date has been the Omicron variant (B.1.1.529), which was first identified in November 2021 [@{url:https://www.who.int/news/item/26-11-2021-classification-of-omicron-(b.1.1.529)-sars-cov-2-variant-of-concern}; @url:https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/science-briefs/scientific-brief-omicron-variant.html].
```
